# microservice-sampler

This is a demonstration of the mocroservices pattern in `Java`. It's built to illustrate the use of the following ideas in one simple 'Todo' application...

1. Microservices 
2. Command and Query Responsibility Separation (CQRS)
3. Event Sourcing

It uses the following technologies to do this...

- Spring-Boot
- Axon Framework
- RabbitMQ (Axon supports any Spring AMQP platform)
- MongoDB (Axon also supports JDBC, JPA, etc...)

## How it works

The domain is literally split into a Command-side microservice and a Query-side microservice (this is CQRS in its most literal form, although it doesn't have to be this way if you don't want it to be).

The **command-side** can process commands such as creating and completing or un-completing a Todo item. The execution of these commands results in `Events` which are stored to disk by Axon (using MongoDB) and propagated out to other VM's (as many as you like) via RabbitMQ.

The **query-side** listens for `Events` coming from RabbitMQ and process them in whatever way makes the most sense. In this simple Todo demo, the query-side builds and maintains a *materialised view* which tracks the state of the individual Todo items (in terms of whether they are complete or incomplete). The query-side can be replicated many times for scalability and the messages held by RabbitMQ are durable, so they can be stored on behalf of the query side if there is a problem.

The command-side and the query-side both have REST API's which can be used to access their capabilities.

## Running the Demo...

Assuming you already have...

- Java JDK 8
- Git
- Docker

...then do the following...

### Bring up the DB and MQ servers...

First lets get the rabbit and mongo servers up. We'll use Docker because its really simple. If you already have MongoDB and RabbitMQ servers available on localhost (and of the default ports), then you can safely skip this step.

```bash
$ docker run -d --name my-mongo -p 27017:27017 mongo
$ docker run -d --name my-rabbit -p 5672:5672 -p 15672:15672 -e RABBITMQ_DEFAULT_USER=test -e RABBITMQ_DEFAULT_PASS=password -e RABBITMQ_NODENAME=my-rabbit rabbitmq:3-management
$ docker ps
```

Executing these commands should pull down the required docker containers and install and run them locally. They're given the names `my-rabbit` and `my-mongo` and they'll run in the background until you ask docker to stop them (using `docker stop my-mongo` for example).

### Clone and build the project...

Next we can download, build it and unit test the microservices project. Here I'm using the Gradle wrapper, so there is no need to actually install Gradle if you don't want to.

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/benwilcock/microservice-sampler.git
$ cd microservice-sampler
$ ./gradlew clean test
```

### Integration Test using multiple VM's...

So far so good. Now we want to test the delivery of event messages to other processes. To do this we need two (**2**) terminal windows. In one window we'll boot the `query-side` (which contains an event-listener and a materialised view), and in the other terminal we'll fire the `command-side` integration tests (which generate commands that generate events).

In **terminal 1**:
```bash
$ ./gradlew query-side:bootRun
```
After lots of output from Spring Boot, you should have a fully booted query-side microservice listening on http port 9002 (which can be changed later if you like).

In **terminal 2**:-

We can check the service is started and that the *material-view* is empty by sending a RESTful query to the service like so:-

```bash
$ curl http://localhost:9002/todo/count
```

This should get a response such as `COUNT: todo=0 done=0` confirming that the query-side has not received any events yet and that the material view is empty.

```bash
$ ./gradlew command-side:integrationTest
```
The integration test sends hundreds of events generated by the command-side to the query-side (via a RabbitMQ exchange). You should see this as lots of logging output in terminal 1 while the test is in progress.

Finally, lets confirm the state of the query side.

In **terminal 2** ask the query-side microservice for a count to show how many complete and incomplete Todo items it has.

```bash
$ curl http://localhost:9002/todo/count
```
You should get an answer that is something like `COUNT: todo=200 done=100` confirming that lots of events were recieved and that the material view was altered accordingly.

